
Registered Accounts are accounts that have some specific benefit or feature(s) and are designated for a specific purpose. Think RRSP (Registered Retirement Savings Plans), RESP (Registered Education Savings Plan), TFSA (Tax Free Savings Account)

An RRSP is a tax deferred account, i.e. you are putting off paying taxes until a later date (ex retirement).
For example, a $1000 contribution into a RRSP (which can then be used to buy stocks, ETFs, mutual funds, etc.) would reduce your income for the current year by the amount of the contribution ($1000), so you would pay less income tax today. However, any money withdrawn from your RRSP is treated as “income” and is taxed at your current marginal income tax rate. So if you sold your investments purchased in your RRSP, and withdrew the proceeds of the sale from your RRSP, they would be taxed at your current marginal income tax rate (hopefully a lower rate in the future if you are retired). You are only deferring paying taxes until you withdraw the funds in the account. Exemptions from this rule include; If you transfer funds from one RRSP to another RRSP account it is not considered as a withdrawal only a transfer and is not subject to taxation. If you withdraw under a particular limit (I think it is \$35,000) to purchase a home (HBP: Home Buyers Plan) it is not subject to taxation, there is also an exemption for educational purposes (LLP: Lifelong Learning Plan).

Your RRSP contribution room is 18% of your previous year's earned income, up to an annual maximum (determined by CRA, was $26,500 for 2019), plus unused contribution room from previous years. So assuming you eared $100,000 your 2019 contribution limit addition would be $18,000. If you earned $1,000,000 in 2019 then you would only gain an additional \$26,500 contribution room in 2019. You total cumulative RRSP contribution room is listed on your CRA (Canada revenue Agency) profile, or if someone else filed your taxes for you they should be able to provide you with your contribution room figure. Any workplace pension plan contributions reduce your personal RRSP contribution room as well. The CRA charges penalties for over contributing to your RRSP account, so it is important to keep track of your contribution room.

There is a useful tax refund calculator you can use to estimate how much money you could get back on your tax return from your RRSP contribution.

https://www.eytaxcalculators.com/en/2019-rrsp-savings-calculator.html

With an earned income of say $100,000 and a contribution of $18,000 you could be eligible for \$6,579 in tax savings if you live in Ontario.

A TFSA is a tax-free account; any money earned in the account is tax free and is not taxed when the money is withdrawn (unlike an RRSP). However you do not get any income tax refunds from making TFSA contributions, but on the flip side any money withdrawn from a TFSA account is not treated as “income” for tax purposes. Your TFSA account contributions are cumulative meaning if you have never contributed anything you could invest up to $63,500 (assuming you were 18+ in 2009, the year the program was introduced) the additional annual contribution room is now $6,000. A lot of people don't even know that you can buy stocks, bonds, ETFs and mutual funds in their TFSA (the name is misleading "savings" account, it should be called a Tax Free Investment Account). You can find your official contribution room listed on your CRA account profile.

Non-Registered Accounts are simply any account that is not a registered account and does not have a specific benefit, feature etc. This is a pretty broad category and includes everything from your savings account to a non-registered brokerage account. You may wish to open a non-registered brokerage account if you have maxed out your RRSP & TFSA contribution room and still want to invest additional savings.
