What is Financial Risk? (It’s actually pretty complicated and has multiple facets, but we’ll just consider financial risk facing an individual investor.) - think volatility vs. stability

A quantitative mathematical approach defines the risk of n individual stock with a beta value. However, I personally believe this metric is an oversimplification of risk, since it is just one relative risk measure. (If you are interested in learning more about beta values see this link);

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/beta.asp

"Risk" in financial terms is the chance that you might loose money. In the short run (1 year or less), financial "risk" is really the chance that the initial amount you invested (the principal) will be worth less at the end of some short period(ex $10 today will only be worth $6 in a year). Over the long run financial "risk" is better defined by the opportunity cost of capital (basically the idea that you earn a lower rate of return than some financial index as a whole). For example, a deposit sitting in a savings account earning 0.05% per year for 10 years vs. the same capital invested in a stock market ETF fund returning 8-10% annually. Therefore, the financial risk in the long run is really that you loose out on the higher return that you could have earned, your opportunity cost.

One very important concept is that is important to clarify the difference between realized gains (losses) & paper gains (losses). A realized gain or loss is made when you sell a stock that you own for more or less than you bought it for. A paper gain or loss occurs when you own a stock and it is worth more or less than you bought it for, but you haven't sold it and "realized" the gain or the loss. If your money is in a bank account and earns say 1.75% annually then you realize that 1.75% gain every year. The point I am trying to make is that at some point there will be another recession and your portfolio may decrease on paper by as much as 30%, but it is only temporary and the worst thing you could do (which sadly most people do) is panic sell what you still own at the reduced price and realize your losses. If you have a long -term investment horizon, recessions are temporary, take the long-term view buy and basically never sell until you retire.

Investing
I think it would be helpful to clarify what diversification means and the context in which you are viewing it. First of all, the motivation behind diversification is to reduce your long-term risk profile by broadening your investment portfolio. Also, just to clarify an investment portfolio refers to any account with two or more separate stocks/bonds/ETFs. Therefore, buying one share of say the VFV ETF Fund gives you a ready made portfolio, since you own fractional stakes of the 500 largest companies in the US (by Market Cap) through each share of the VFV fund that you purchase.

There are essentially two broad diversification categories;

#1: Market risk (a.k.a systematic risk) vs. specific risk (unsystematic risk)
Market risk is the possibility of an investor to experience losses due to factors that affect the overall performance of the financial markets (can refer to the entire global economy or a specific geographic region) in which you are invested. Market risk, also called "systematic risk," cannot be eliminated through diversification.

Specific risk, or unsystematic risk, only affects an industry or particular company. If I owned two stocks in my portfolio, each additional stock I added to my portfolio would reduce my overall specific risk profile, by reducing my % weighting in any one company. Each different stock you added to your portfolio would further diversify away an additional portion of specific risk. Obviously adding stocks from different sectors (ex Financials, Tech, Energy, etc.) has a greater impact on the diversification of specific risk. Portfolio model theory and statistical analysis tells us that the majority of specific risk can be reduced through diversification by holding around 20 securities. At this rate, when properly distributed among company size, industry, and other factors, these securities help to reduce specific risk.
Simplified, this means that owning one share of the VFV fund (a proxy for the US economy) achieves the maximum possible benefits of diversification reducing all specific risk associated with any individual US company, leaving you with only the market risk associated with the US stock market as a whole. This is the reason that people buy a unit/share of a particular fund rather than picking 20 individual stocks themselves.

#2: Diversification Across Markets
While buying a share of say the VFV fund may have diversified away all specific risk, if 100% of my assets were in only the VFV fund then I would be impacted 100% by factors specific to the US economy. So you may decide to invest in a different market or region based on your assumptions about the future performance of that region's markets. To provide you with some real world examples the TSX (Toronto Stock Exchange) has basically returned 20% since 2014. The Canadian stock market is mostly composed of oil, gas & mining companies, plus the 5 major Canadian banks. In December of 2014 OPEC decided to increase their production of oil. They have a lower cost of production per barrel on average (so they can afford to do this). They dramatically increased the supply and oil prices went from $95+ per barrel to $35 by Jan 2016 (below the cost of production for many Canadian companies). In comparison, the S&P 500 as returned a (simple average return) of around 20% per year for the last 5 years. So geographic/sector allocation is really important.
